All data Used and their corresponding codebooks can be found in the technical report. The full technical report can be found below: 

Is Charlotte's spending in Elementary Schools effective for its rate of growth?
Authors:
Caleb Watson
Anthony Dicarlantonio
Aavanth Ezhilan
Purushothama Brahmam Chunduri

Executive Summary
In this report we will be answering the question “Is Charlotte's spending in Elementary Schools effective for its rate of growth?” by aggregating a variety of relational databases pulled from Charlotte and Orlando. We will then supply budget recommendations based on our conclusions.

Introduction
Education is a cornerstone of society and is very important in today’s landscape in terms of measured success and growth. As a result, there is a lot of focus on reform and constant improvement in Charlotte’s education system. Charlotte is a growing city with a dynamic population so it was necessary that we found another growing urban city to compare it to. According to the United States Census, Charlotte has grown 34% over the past decade and Orlando has grown 20% over the same period of time. While Charlotte’s growth rate exceeds Orlando’s, the two cities are well above the 9% average growth rate for all U.S Metropolitan areas, which still makes Orlando a reasonable comparison for a growing city. We understand that a high growth rate stems from migration of various demographics across the country, rather than high birth rates. What this means is that we can expect to see a similar growth rate within our educational systems over the next decade as birth rates start to rise from the increased population. This prompts our following research to answer the question: Is Charlotte’s spending in elementary schools effective for it’s rate of growth? When we analyze spending, we will do our best to focus on areas that impact the scalability of the education system in order to make conclusions about being able to meet demand for the city’s growth. We believe that the most effective spending in elementary schools during times of high growth rates, is funding for new schools and creating equal opportunities for all racial groups to have an education. This research will begin by defining all concepts we use when making our analysis, as well as which areas we focused on within the budgets of Charlotte and Orlando during our comparison. We recognize that there are various types of stakeholders, and will emphasize potential ethical benefits and harms through a lense of virtue ethics. The data presented will compare similar spending of Charlotte and Orlando to results taken from the Current Population Survey. This path will lead us to clear and distinct recommendations for Charlotte’s elementary school spending.

Literature Review
	Throughout our research we are trying to be as morally just as ever.  After all, as researchers it would be foolish to begin explaining our research in depth, and how we can use that research to implement revisions and strategies without considering the ethical context of our research. Viewing our research from this third person perspective requires us to keep grounds in what we are doing ethically in our study. The best way to encompass this perspective is to describe it as virtuous. Which in short means a constant perpetuation between varying understandings of ethical landscapes, but more on that later. In this section, we will first operationalize and conceptualize the data variables used throughout the project. Shortly thereafter we will discuss the nuances of Charlotte and Orlando. Then we will consider the stakeholders involved in our research, with examination of some quotes from accredited researchers who have already dealt in similar ethical spaces. Finally, we will conclude this portion of our research by discussing the overall harms and benefits, and the “what” in  “What are we doing?”.
It is important to take a step back and explain what is going on in our research. After all, if a researcher's findings cannot be thoroughly communicated and understood the results are useless. With this being said we must clearly define the concepts of our research question. We will define “Charlotte’s Elementary School Spending” by examining elementary school funds in the overall education budget of Charlotte, then compare it to a similar city. We will operationalize “Charlotte’s Elementary School Spending” with the elementary education budget as stated in the 2021 Annual Education Budget Report of both Charlotte, and the correlating report of its similar city: Orlando. Whether or not the spending is “effective” is determined by general educational attainment of Charlotte compared to Orlando. Educational attainment will later be operationalized by data pooled from the CPS. The “Rate of Growth” of Charlotte is defined as the overall growth in Charlotte's population, and operationalized by annual population growth. All data variables will be essential to our research
Hold on, before we go too much further you might be asking yourself “How is Orlando Different from Charlotte”? When examining data and recommendations that are heavily based on this underlying premise that Charlotte and Orlando are comparable cities, this premise must be nearly bulletproof. Charlotte’s decadal population growth is much more than Orlando, but Orlando’s population is also slightly larger than Charlotte. These differences can be explained by an obvious fact that Orlando’s population growth has stagnated compared to what it was in previous decades. Whereas Charlotte’s population growth is at comparable to levels of Orlando one decade prior. It seems Charlotte is experiencing the growth rate NOW that Orlando saw one decade ago. This can explain not only the difference in growth rate of the two cities, but additionally the reason Orlando has a slightly larger population than that of Charlotte. Now that we have defined some of the key concepts that will be used in our research we must talk about who our research affects.
	When we are considering such hefty topics as education and infrastructure, we are very much so directly dealing with the futures of some individuals' lives. For example, if we were to recommend an increase in budget allocations to build new elementary schools, the decision we make has an impact on multitudes of individuals that will now have to change their lifestyle according to our decision. For example an individual may have to physically travel less to a new school that is now closer to them because of our decisions to build a new school. An alternative example would be that individuals who have to pass through the area to get to work have to leave 20 minutes earlier because the school altered traffic patterns. Our decisions have an impact on many people, but in different magnitudes and scenarios. It is our duty as researchers to try to “navigate (this) messy, open-ended, constantly shifting social landscape”(Vallor, S., Green , B., & Raicu, I. (2018). ETHICS IN TECH PRACTICE, 7–7.) that there is no defined right answer or solution to make “everyone happy” so to say, but we must attempt to find the “rightest” answer that there is. This is a large part of what Virtue Ethics is all about. This will be the ethical lens we look at our research through. As we look at our research questions’ stakeholders, we must always be reminded of this aspect of virtue ethics specifically due to its relevance in our project.
	Our stakeholders that will be affected are Teacher, Students, and Policymakers first and foremost. Teachers and students will be affected because the funding for the system in which they work on a daily basis is being altered. If we determine that the Charlotte’s Education Budget is not effective in some manner and it needs to be changed, then the changing of that budget affects those that make the budget report, those that are affected by the allocations that make budgetary room for more capital projects. Additionally, an important stakeholder to consider when stepping back and looking at our research from a virtuous ethical perspective are parents. Vallor states “virtue ethics is highly context sensitive” which is the most applicable to our stakeholders who are parents. If we decide that building a new elementary school is the most efficient budgetary action, then ALL parents of elementary school students in Charlotte will be affected by our decision, but in different contexts and scales. For example, parents within the district of our newly built school are faced with the reality of paying more to continue at their current school, or be faced with attending a completely foreign school to them. On the other hand, some parents will undoubtedly benefit from our decision. Such as parents who have students attending more crowded elementary schools, in which our decision will help improve school-to-student ratio. Taxpayers also must be considered when discussing stakeholders. After all, ANY budget allocation that is made we have to remember is ultimately derived from their money that is paid to the city. All applicable job-searching Charlotte citizens have a stake in our decision as well, considering a decision to build a school involves employment not only to construct the school, but to staff the school. While the latter of these stakeholders hold more of a communal stake and are less context sensitive, they are nonetheless important stakeholders. 
	With a close virtuous consideration to all implications of our research, and our stakeholder’s “stakes”. We can now look at the overall picture of our research and answer the question “Are we doing more harm than good?”. This is an extremely vague question that can be dissected into multitudes of moral planes, and explained in detail to support one side of the argument over the other. The most important principle considered from our virtuous perspective is that we are operating within the NC Education System: one of the lowest funded education systems in the US.  As accredited researchers Prinsloo and Slade said “Education as moral practice entails that we cannot separate the means from the end”(Prinsloo, P., & Slade, S. (2018). Chapter 8. In Big Data and Learning Analytics in higher education: Current theory and (pp. 119–119). essay, SPRINGER. ) which is especially applicable to North Carolina, and Charlotte's massively underfunded education system. On the other hand taking a step back and looking from a virtuous perspective again we weigh in those who will be harmed by our research. First and foremost our teachers and students will be either geographically affected as described in the previous section, or affected by the amount of workload shifted towards or away from them in response to our recommendations. Our secondary group that is considered when contemplating ethical harms mainly consists of those budget appropriators, and those in administrative positions that make allocations to allot monetary space for our recommendations. Overall the increase in educational attainment triumphs the possible harms that our research newly introduces.
	With all implications of our data and virtuous ethics considered you still might have some questions unanswered. Is it necessary to provide so much data to recommend such surface level monetary adjustments? The answer to that is: absolutely, and why not? First and foremost, as researchers must utilize data to back up every statement or fact that is not commonly known knowledge, or else your research is a product of sloppily congregated assumptions. Secondly, if we have the ability to prove statements and recommendations that hold such heavy weight as this bestowed on us, then it just makes sense to do so. Just as Prinsloo and Slade said “With the introduction of learning management systems, the potential to monitor and impact on  individual student performance has increased exponentially.”(Prinsloo, P., & Slade, S. (2018). Chapter 8. In Big Data and Learning Analytics in higher education: Current theory and (pp. 113–113). essay, SPRINGER.). Just as Slade and Prinsloo use their newly developed learning management systems to better impact their research we will also use these newly introduced concepts of data manipulation and data tools to every bit of our advantage. 
	Now that we feel we have discussed who our research affects, how it affects them, defined/operationalized data variables, and discussed the overall picture of what research has been done in this field before. We can move onto explaining our research in depth.

	
	

	





Data
With there being a strong correlation between city demographics and their education levels, we decided to look into city dynamics when deciding which city we wanted to compare Charlotte Mecklenburg Schools to. After doing some further research using the Current Population Survey we found that the demographics between the two cities are very comparable. The CPS data shows that both cities have similar percentages of people under 18, Charlotte being around 23 percent and Orlando being around 21 percent. Due to the fact that we are focusing on education, specifically elementary education, this statistic is very useful to us as it shows that both cities have a similar amount of people that are still in school. Other than that the CPS also showed that the two cities have similar populations when it comes to sex as Charlotte has a female population of 51.9% while Orlando has a female population population of 52%. The population breakdown alone is very similar regardless of the difference in area between the two cities. Charlotte has around 2400 people per square mile and Orlando has about 2300 people per square mile. Due to these statistics from the Current Population Survey we can conclude that the two cities are very comparable in terms of education.
In order to make recommendations to the Charlotte Mecklenburg School District, which we are going to refer to as CMS, we must look at data to support our argument. In this section we are going to look into our data through visuals such as bar graphs and pie charts in order to come to conclusions about effective education spending in CMS schools, specifically elementary schools. When analyzing the budget report and comparing it to another city, we must consider the proportions of spending relative to the overall budget since both cities are allocated different amounts. We have defined the categories being analyzed as “high rate of growth” categories, making them relevant to the research question. Capital Projects’ relevance correlates to increase in population, while Student Support Services correlates to maintaining ethnic diversity in the education system. At first diversity might seem irrelevant, however it has been shown that maintaining a diverse classroom has a direct contribution to students’ success. “Students who stayed in diverse schools from elementary to high schools benefited the most in both reading and mathematics standardized test scores”(Wang & Pugalee (2020)jkdfvjkdfvjn). The charts below make use of data provided through each city’s respective budget report, and make comparisons of those proportions to make our determinations.

The first chart we look at, evaluates Capital Project spending. This category is easily identified as relevant to efficiency for a high growth city since it focuses on building new schools to handle the additional students. Charlotte’s percent of spending in this category relative to the overall budget is nearly four times less than Orlando’s. This is a meaningful comparison because we would expect Charlotte to have nearly an identical proportion of spending as Orlando, since Charlotte is currently growing at a higher rate than Orlando. We might even expect Charlotte to have a higher proportion of spending due to the same reasoning. At a high growth rate, the city runs the risk of overcrowding their elementary schools. Once overcrowding gets out of control, teacher workload will increase and become potentially unmanageable. Additionally, student success is likely to become limited as instructional support becomes scarce due to increased pupil/teacher ratios. These types of harms can be combated by proactively building new elementary schools to handle the increased student population. The bar chart illustrates Orlando’s recognition of importance in this category. It is fair to assume through this analysis that Charlotte may not be holding this category as high of a priority as they may need.

In this next chart we are looking at the overall educational budget for Charlotte Mecklenburg Schools and the educational budget for Orange County Schools. We can see the comparison between each school districts’ student support service spending and their overall spending. Though it is seen that Orlando has a larger education budget than Charlotte, they still have an unproportionally larger percentage that is allotted to student support services. The amount is not just a slight increase either, Orlando is spending six times as much in proportion to their overall spending for education. This can be a problem when you see that one of Charlotte’s main goals with the budget is to increase diversity and be more inclusive to every student. This is very important again because Charlotte is growing at such a fast rate that diversity is constantly increasing and without similar spending to match the growing diversity then it becomes increasingly difficult for Charlotte to reach its academic goals. In addition to this student support services also has been described as “Funding to promote equitable access to educational opportunity”. By leveling out the playing field for all students and giving them all fair opportunities then Charlotte can increase the graduation rate and fulfill their goals for academic achievement.

This last chart helps us to draw conclusions from our previous analysis. When comparing spending in the previous two categories (that we conceptualize as impactful towards rate of growth) we notice Orlando exceeds Charlotte in these spending efforts. However, in order to determine that Charlotte should in fact be spending more to be effective, we must make a final comparison to analyze. The data in the last bar chart above, is taken from the CPS. It shows us the education status of participants in both Orlando and Charlotte. While the CPS data is only a subset of both populations, we draw meaningful conclusions from the sampled data to represent the growing population. The chart illustrates Orlando being more educated in all levels of education compared to Charlotte. The most significant category in relation to our research is “highschool or lower”. Since we assume the sample to be indicative of the overall population for each respective city, we can make the claim that this data provides supported evidence that Charlotte is not effectively spending to achieve optimal educational status among residents. After reviewing growth related categories within the education budgets, it is apparent that Orlando puts a greater spending effort towards these categories than Charlotte does at times of comparable growth rates. Since Orlando also achieves a higher educational status, we can accurately justify the claim that if Charlotte were to increase spending in these categories the city could expect to achieve higher education status.
Recommendations
	When taking the data into account we can make conclusions about the current state of the Charlotte Mecklenburg education system. Our first recommendation would be for the Charlotte Mecklenburg education system to increase the budget for the Total Expenditures for Capital Projects. This would allow for more elementary schools to be built to accommodate the growing population of students enrolling the school systems in Charlotte Mecklenburg Schools. As the city continues to grow and expand similar to the current rate that it is currently on, this will become a necessity rather than just a pleasurable desire. This will lead to more personalized learning as the students will be more spread out between schools which will result in a better teacher to student ratio. 
Our second recommendation would be for the city of Charlotte to append to the Charlotte Mecklenburg Education Budget to allocate a specific amount of money towards student support services as it would be beneficial. Going back to the increasing size and the large amount of population growth that Charlotte has experienced recently, we can assume that this trend is not going to stop soon and so diversity will continue to grow along with the sheer population of Charlotte. The increase in diversity will lead to an increase in diversity in schools and so there needs to be adequate help and resources provided to every student in order to help each child learn and grow in their own way without feeling as if they are being left behind. By increasing the money allocated towards student support services we aim to do just that, we also plan on potentially adding programs which will allow kids to feel like they are in a safe learning environment so they can learn to the best of their abilities. 
Finally, our last recommendation would be for the city of Charlotte to implement a stated plan for a new elementary school by the release of the 2022 adopted budget similar to that of Orlando. This one goes hand-in-hand with our first recommendation. A written and stated plan will ensure that the new schools are built with the increase in money towards total expenditures for capital projects. By building these new schools we aim towards more personalized learning for the students in order to hopefully get similar results as our comparison city, Orlando.











Bibliography:
Prinsloo, P., & Slade, S. (2018). Chapter 8. In Big Data and Learning Analytics in higher education: Current theory and (pp. 119–119). essay, SPRINGER. 
Prinsloo, P., & Slade, S. (2018). Chapter 8. In Big Data and Learning Analytics in higher education: Current theory and (pp. 113–113). essay, SPRINGER. 
Vallor, S., Green , B., & Raicu, I. (2018). ETHICS IN TECH PRACTICE, 7–7. 
Vallor, S., Green , B., & Raicu, I. (2018). ETHICS IN TECH PRACTICE, 8–8. 
Wang, C. (2019, December 29). Impacts of school racial composition on the mathematics ... Impacts of School Racial Composition on the Mathematics and Reading Achievement Gap in Post Unitary Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools. Retrieved December 14, 2021, from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0013124519894970 
CPS DATA USED:https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/cps/cps-basic.html




